Welcome!
Here’s a preview of what we’ll discover
in this month’s program.
Have you ever wanted to turn back time
and undo something
you wish you hadn’t done?
In this month’s My Teen Life,
we’ll hear how Thalila and José,
who each with help
from their parents and Jehovah,
made progress after a setback.
If we’ve strayed far from Jehovah,
our own heart may make us feel
like we could never come back.
This month’s music video
will remind us how great
Jehovah’s love is
for those who want to return to him.
If a brother once served as an elder
but is not presently,
what can help him to regain his privileges?
We’ll hear the experiences of two brothers
in a segment
with this thought-provoking title:
Return and Serve Again!
There’s much to look forward to
in this March 2023 edition
of JW Broadcasting®.
Have you ever set a goal for yourself
that was harder to reach
than you first thought?
How did that make you feel?
In this dramatization,
note the adjustments a sister makes
to work toward her goal.
That was terrible.
I could’ve answered that better.
No, you did great, really.
I’ve always been hard on myself.
... strengthen our faith.
Then if we,
um, um—
No, that’s all.
Sometimes it made me so anxious
that even the normal stuff I did
felt impossible.
So, what do you think brings this on?
I don’t know, maybe—
Maybe lately it’s
because I’m thinking about SKE.
If I can reach that goal, it’ll be fine.
I see.
How about we read
a scripture that might help?
OK.
They didn’t discourage me from SKE.
But they suggested
that I try to manage the anxiety first.
I was on it!
If I focused on my goal
and took care of myself, I’d get there.
Maybe it was a little too much focus.
Thank you, brothers.
So?
They’re right.
SKE would be a lot for me right now.
Mm.
I’m sorry, but you’ll get there.
I tried everything to fix this.
What’s wrong with me?
Nothing.
Some things just take time.
Yeah.
Hey, I have Lilly’s study tomorrow morning.
I could use your help.
OK.
I want to get baptized,
but I don’t know.
You all do so much.
I don’t think I could ever really be . . .
I think I understand.
Can I show you something?
Micah 6:8
—would you read that?
“He has told you, O man, what is good.
“And what is
Jehovah requiring of you?
“Only to exercise justice,
to cherish loyalty,
and to walk in modesty with your God!”
That last part, “walk in modesty,”
that’s about knowing our limitations.
So is Jehovah happy
with what you can do,
or does he want what you can’t do?
He only expects what I can do.
Then why should we expect more?
It turns out I gave Lilly
the same advice the brothers gave me.
It was my turn to apply it.
I had to be honest with myself.
My limitation was my own high expectation.
I’d been doing it so long
that there was no quick fix.
It didn’t mean giving up on my goals, though.
I just tried to focus more
on what I could do in the present,
like having more empathy
for people who feel like I do
and showing them
how much Jehovah values them.
We could tell a Bible student how we, um,
how we overcame a challenge.
That might . . .
The truth is,
I can actually do a lot for Jehovah
with reasonable expectations.
Our sister learned to manage her anxiety,
in part,
by managing her expectations
—a crucial step
to giving her best to Jehovah.
That lesson is an excellent introduction
to this month’s theme:
“Realistic Expectations
—The Key to Joyful and Successful Service.”
When you hear the word “realistic,”
what comes to your mind?
“Realistic” conveys the idea
of something that is practical,
rational, reasonable, and sensible.
Having expectations that are realistic
is essential to joy
and success in Jehovah’s service.
In contrast, unrealistic expectations
cause discouragement,
as Proverbs 13:12 says:
“Expectation postponed makes the heart sick,
but a desire realized is a tree of life.”
Appropriately, we often use this verse
when referring to expectations
that are not achieved
as quickly as we would like.
However, expectations that are too high
can also make our heart sick.
Notice this quote
from the August 8, 1983, issue of  Awake!:
“Disappointment is often not so much a matter
“of ‘expectation postponed,’
“as expectations too high.
“Now at times it is good to have high goals,
“to ‘aim for the stars.’
“But always  expecting to come out on top
is a surefire way to beckon disappointment.”
To avoid disappointment,
our expectations should be
reasonable and sensible.
In our discussion,
we’re going to answer the following
three questions about our expectations:
(1) Why must we be realistic
about what we expect from ourselves?
(2) Why must we be realistic
in what we expect
from our brothers and sisters?
(3) Why is it realistic to expect
that Jehovah will reward us
for our faithful sacred service?
Our first question is,
Why must we be realistic
about what we expect from ourselves?
Of course, we love Jehovah
with our whole heart, mind, and soul,
and we want to do everything for his glory.
However, the reality is
that no matter how much we love Jehovah
and want to obey him,
we are sinful descendants of Adam.
As a result,
we occasionally transgress in thought,
word, and deed.
Ecclesiastes 7:20 states:
“For there is no righteous man on earth
who always does good and never sins.”
And James 3:2 reads:
“For we all stumble many times.
“If anyone does not stumble in word,
he is a perfect man.”
Perhaps you can relate
to the feelings of the apostle Paul
at Romans 7:18-20:
“For I know that in me,
“that is, in my flesh,
“there dwells nothing good;
“for I have the desire to do what is fine
“but not the ability to carry it out.
“For I do not do the good that I wish,
“but the bad that I do not wish
“is what I practice.
“If, then, I do what I do not wish,
“I am no longer the one carrying it out,
but it is the sin dwelling in me.”
Paul’s struggle with his sinful flesh
made him feel miserable.
At times,
we too might feel dejected,
disappointed,
and frustrated over our shortcomings.
We may begin to feel like a failure.
What enabled Paul to continue
serving Jehovah with joy and zeal?
He honestly acknowledged his sinful condition
and had complete confidence
in the ransom sacrifice of Jesus Christ.
Paul went on to say at Romans 7:24, 25:
“Miserable man that I am!
“Who will rescue me
“from the body undergoing this death?
Thanks to God through Jesus Christ our Lord!”
Yes, through Jehovah’s undeserved kindness
and his loving provision of the ransom,
we can confidently remain in Jehovah’s love
and render worship that’s acceptable to him,
even in our imperfect state.
How powerful is the ransom
in allowing us to have a clean conscience
and retain Jehovah’s approval?
Acts 3:19 answers this question:
“Repent, therefore,
“and turn around so as to get your sins
“blotted out,
so that seasons of refreshing
may come from Jehovah himself.”
The original-language word
translated “blotted out”
means “to cause to disappear by wiping,”
“to remove so as to leave no trace.”
Jehovah completely wipes out our sin.
To illustrate:
Imagine a white writing surface
representing our clean standing
before Jehovah.
Now imagine that red dots are drawn on it,
representing our sins.
We should not view the ransom
as if Jehovah draws an  X
over each dot to cross them out.
Those red dots would still be visible.
Rather, we should imagine Jehovah,
based on the ransom,
completely erasing the red dots
so that a clean,
white writing surface is restored.
Jehovah further reassures us
of the completeness of his forgiveness
with the words recorded at Psalm 103:12-14.
Jehovah ‘remembers that we are dust’
and does not expect perfection from us.
As a merciful Father,
he puts our sins “as far off
as the sunrise is from the sunset.”
Even if a servant of Jehovah
commits a serious sin,
if he is truly repentant with godly sadness,
his sin can be blotted out,
completely forgiven.
Therefore, it is essential for us to maintain
a reasonable, sensible,
realistic view of our imperfect state.
We’re going to make mistakes,
but we must have full trust in the reality
of Jehovah’s forgiveness based on the ransom.
Also, we can learn valuable lessons
from our errors
so that we’ll be less likely to repeat them.
We need patience, though,
because some personality flaws and bad habits
may not go away overnight.
Some of them may even be a lifelong battle.
At times, we may need counsel and discipline.
What should we realistically expect
when receiving discipline?
Hebrews 12:11-13
makes it clear
that initially it will not “be joyous.”
“It is painful”!
However, when we humbly accept discipline
and apply the counsel,
we can be sure that we will gain inner peace
and be a better servant of Jehovah.
Therefore, do not give up,
but keep making progress.
Never allow the Devil
to convince you that you are a failure.
As stated in the September 1, 2001,
issue of  The Watchtower,  on page 18:
“Satan would like nothing better
than to rob you of your peace . . . .
“He would surely like you
to feel that your imperfection
“makes your service unacceptable to God.
Never allow the Devil to demoralize you!”
Our second question for consideration is,
Why must we be realistic
in what we expect
from our brothers and sisters?
Just as it’s essential
to avoid having expectations
that are too high for ourselves,
we must also avoid expecting too much
from our brothers and sisters.
Such unreasonable expectations create stress,
disappointment, and frustration.
The  Awake!  of September 8, 1994,
quoted a factory supervisor who said:
“You have to accept people as they are.
“If you expect more than they can give,
“[you] will elevate the stress level,
making everyone unhappy.”
We should expect from our fellow workers
what Jehovah and Jesus expect from them.
Jesus’ illustration of the talents,
recorded in Matthew chapter 25,
conveys their thinking.
The main point of this illustration
is that the Master, Jesus,
expects each of his anointed brothers
—the slaves and, by extension,
those who are of the other sheep—
to do his or her best
in the assigned work
of preaching the good news.
How did Jesus distribute the work?
Matthew 25:15 provides the answer:
“He gave five talents to one,
“two to another,
“and one to still another,
“to each according to his own ability,
and he went abroad.”
Jehovah and Jesus are pleased with
and will reward each of us
when we do our best
within our circumstances and ability.
When the slave with two talents
gained two more,
the master did not say to him,
‘Why did you not gain five more
like your fellow slave?’
He gave the two-talent slave
the same commendation
as the one who was given the five
and gained five more:
“Well done, good and faithful slave!
“You were faithful over a few things.
“I will appoint you over many things.
Enter into the joy of your master.”
As a result,
the two-talent slave
could be just as successful
and joyful as the five-talent slave.
They both met
their master’s reasonable expectations,
and their master was joyful too.
What a fine lesson for all of us,
including those serving as elders!
In imitation of Jehovah and Jesus,
we should never put pressure on our brothers
to do more than they’re capable of doing.
Failure to take this reasonable
and realistic approach
can result in much frustration.
Another way that we show
we have reasonable expectations
is to acknowledge
that from time to time disagreements
and hurt feelings
will arise among our brothers.
Have you ever heard someone say,
“I expect to be treated that way
by the world, but not by my brother”?
Is it reasonable to expect
that there will not be any
difficulties among brothers?
No.
Does Jesus expect that at times
his disciples will have difficulties
among themselves?
Yes.
Why can we say this?
Remember some of the expressions
Jesus used throughout
the Sermon on the Mount:
“Happy are the peacemakers,
since they will be called sons of God.”
“If . . . you are bringing
your gift to the altar
“and there you remember
that your brother has something against you,
“leave your gift there in front of the altar,
and go away.
“First make your peace with your brother,
and then come back and offer your gift.”
“Forgive us our debts,
as we also have forgiven our debtors.”
“Stop judging that you may not be judged.”
These verses show
that Jesus knew his disciples
would have challenges among themselves.
That was a realistic expectation.
But it’s also reasonable
to conclude that these problems
can be successfully resolved
if godly principles are applied.
Then peace can be restored.
Additionally, we should expect some tensions
to arise among the brotherhood today.
But by applying Bible principles,
peace can be restored and maintained.
We’ll now consider our third question:
Why is it realistic to expect
that Jehovah will reward us
for our faithful sacred service?
At Hebrews 11:6,
the Bible tells us that Jehovah
is “the rewarder
of those earnestly seeking him.”
And at 1 Corinthians 15:58,
the apostle Paul encourages us
to have “plenty to do
in the work of the Lord,
knowing that your labor is not in vain.”
Paul was absolutely sure
of his heavenly reward.
Despite his sins
prior to becoming a Christian
and his battles with sinful inclinations,
please note his confidence
expressed at 2 Timothy 4:7, 8:
“I have fought the fine fight,
“I have run the race to the finish,
“I have observed the faith.
“From this time on,
“there is reserved for me
the crown of righteousness,
“which the Lord, the righteous judge,
“will give me as a reward in that day,
“yet not to me only,
but also to all those
who have loved his manifestation.”
We can have similar confidence
in the reward Jehovah has promised,
whether our hope is heavenly
or to enjoy everlasting life
on a paradise earth!
This is a realistic expectation
because our reasonable and loving God
has promised it,
and he does not lie.
Therefore, may we develop
and maintain
realistic expectations for ourselves
and for our fellow workers.
May we never lose sight of the reality
that Jehovah
will reward “those earnestly seeking him.”
If we have realistic expectations,
we can find joy and success
in our service to Jehovah now,
as well as have the prospect
of doing so forever.
Young ones,
no doubt you have many expectations
for the life that lies ahead of you.
Be assured
that Jehovah wants the best for you
and will give you holy spirit
and the direction you need
to make good choices.
But what can you do if you make a decision
that in the end
disappoints you or those who love you?
Let’s watch this next episode:
My Teen Life
—How Can I Fix My Mistakes?
I started to make a lot of friends at school,
and aside from school,
I began learning how to Rollerblade.
So whenever I’d go out to practice,
I’d meet lots of different people.
I made some mistakes
because of bad associations.
We started going out at night
and maybe just drinking a little alcohol.
But eventually, we were drinking a lot.
By the time I realized what was happening,
I was already really involved.
I was 17 years old.
I started being close friends with them.
They were everything to me,
and I really trusted them.
They were doing some wrong things
like doing drugs and using bad language.
But I thought: ‘I’m just with them.
As long as I don’t do what they’re doing,
it’s not a problem.’
I began to make excuses,
saying that it didn’t really matter
and that there wasn’t anything wrong
with what I was doing.
My spiritual routine
was just going to the meetings.
I started missing some meetings.
I never prayed.
I didn’t even know how to do personal study.
I wasn’t reading the Bible every day.
In this group of friends,
there was a boy who liked me
and asked me out.
And since all my friends were dating,
I thought, ‘Why not?’
So I started dating him,
and my parents had no idea.
I’d lie about where I was going,
what I’d be doing, and who I’d be with.
I was pretty much
two completely different people.
At home, I was one way,
and with my friends, I was another.
I tried to pray to Jehovah,
but I just couldn’t.
I felt ashamed because I knew inside
that Jehovah wasn’t happy
with what I was doing.
My conscience really bothered me.
There was a moment when my boyfriend
and then some of those friends
really let me down.
I began thinking about how I
didn’t have anyone else in my life.
One time, we were all drinking,
and this girl invited us all
to go to her house.
I started thinking
about what might happen
if I said yes to that girl’s invitation.
I knew that there’d be drinking, drugs,
and maybe even something immoral
might happen.
So after having not prayed
for a really long time,
I closed my eyes and said:
“Jehovah, please help me.
I’m just so alone.
I don’t have anyone.”
I felt completely abandoned by everyone.
So right then and there,
I said a prayer to Jehovah,
asking him
that if he would help me to say no,
from that day forward,
I would stop associating with those friends
and serve him whole-souled.
Many times,
I asked Jehovah to forgive me.
I said:
“Jehovah, you’re the only one I have.
Please help me.”
And that’s exactly what happened.
After saying that prayer,
I felt determined to leave.
I started thinking
about everything that I’d done
and how I was putting
not only my own life at risk
but also my relationship with Jehovah.
I thought, ‘I’m going to talk to the elders.’
Since I’m a very shy person,
the thought of confessing my mistakes
was really difficult.
I talked to them,
and I told them everything that had happened.
It was like a weight had been lifted off me.
I saw that I really wasn’t alone after all.
I still remember a scripture
that they read to me
at Psalm 86:5,
which showed me that Jehovah’s forgiveness
has no limits if I’m truly repentant.
So I knew that Jehovah would forgive me.
But the elders also told me
that I’d have to tell my parents,
which was very difficult.
But I thought, ‘Well, I need to speak up.’
And I just opened up
and told them about what had happened.
I decided
that I was going talk with an elder,
and he read a scripture with me
from Philippians 4:7,
which says that “the peace of God
“that surpasses all understanding
will guard [our] hearts.”
So I was able to pray again,
knowing that if I really changed,
I could feel that peace
that comes from Jehovah.
I started studying the Bible for real.
I stopped associating with those friends
and started being more involved
in spiritual things.
I had the privilege of getting baptized
and becoming a regular pioneer.
And today, I’m serving at Bethel.
I had the privilege of being invited
to help with construction projects,
but my greatest privilege
is the strong friendship
that I have with Jehovah
and also having true friends.
I’ve seen that Jehovah
has always been by my side.
And even when I didn’t want to be with him,
Jehovah never abandoned me.
Isn’t it encouraging
to see how Jehovah gives us
just what we need
to get back up if we stumble?
Our loving Father
is indeed “ready to forgive.”
Our music video this month reminds us
of Jehovah’s loving concern
for those who suffer a spiritual fall.
In the whole of humankind,
Be sure you’ll never find
Someone who can say,
“I’ve never stumbled in my life.”
And now this time it’s you,
But there’s something you can do:
Learn from the experience,
And take the help our loving God provides.
Get back up when you’re down.
You can turn this around.
Get back up; stand up tall.
You can learn from a fall.
Just reach out;
take his hand.
He’ll raise you up—
make you stand.
And one thing that’s for sure:
You’ll be stronger than before
If you learn from a fall.
Another dawn is breaking,
And your heart may be aching.
But you can’t go back in time.
You have to see it through.
Stop and think it over,
And take it to Jehovah.
His Word is there to guide you,
To pick you up and show you what to do.
Get back up when you’re down.
You can turn this around.
Get back up; stand up tall.
You can learn from a fall.
Just reach out;
take his hand.
He’ll raise you up—
make you stand.
And one thing that’s for sure:
You’ll be stronger than before.
Let Jehovah’s Word remind you
You can put it all behind you.
His love “is greater than our hearts,”
You may recall.
Learn from a fall.
Get back up when you’re down.
You can turn this around.
Get back up; stand up tall.
You can learn from a fall.
Just reach out;
take his hand.
He’ll raise you up—
make you stand.
And one thing that’s for sure:
You’ll be stronger than before
If you learn from a fall.
You can learn from a fall.
That music video beautifully illustrates
a point from our discussion:
We can recover from a fall.
With Jehovah,
that’s always a reasonable expectation.
More than 20 years ago,
Awake!  magazine published
the life story
of Alena Žitníková.
Alena realized that pleasing Jehovah
would mean rejection by this world.
But in the following episode
of Where Are They Now?
note what she describes
as perhaps an even bigger test.
My name is Alena Žitníková,
and I was born into a family
of a zealous Communist.
We believed that a world was coming
where people would have
everything they needed.
They’d be happy,
and there would be peace worldwide,
and I deeply believed it.
But I found paradise
among God’s people.
As I grew up,
I realized that Communism
had its deficits
because I saw its hypocrisy.
People didn’t practice
what they preached.
In high school, I met a friend
who started talking about God and the Bible.
So the fact that God’s name is Jehovah
and that something
called God’s Kingdom
and Armageddon will come
—those were all new concepts for me.
I’d never heard of these things before.
I’d never even held a Bible in my hand.
A Bible study
gradually helped me gain faith.
In 1983, I was baptized in a bathtub.
At that time, Jehovah’s Witnesses
were under ban.
In 1989,
the Velvet Revolution took place
in Czechoslovakia.
That also meant a change
for Jehovah’s Witnesses
because we could begin
to express our faith publicly.
The house-to-house ministry started,
and it was something
amazing and new for me.
I got to know Petr
in our local congregation,
and we got married in 1990.
We entered into full-time service
two years after the wedding.
We first started serving as regular pioneers,
and two years later
we were invited to Bethel.
Those were years full of joy
and full of hard work,
which greatly enriched me.
We left Bethel eight years later,
and I found that people had changed.
And it was a challenge for us
because now people
had become more materialistic.
When I learned the truth,
it seemed to me
that Armageddon was at the door
—that it would come soon.
And the world helped us in a way
because it didn’t want us;
it didn’t want Jehovah’s Witnesses.
But today’s world, with its freedom,
doesn’t tell us that it doesn’t want us.
In fact, it wants us.
It wants our time, it wants our attention,
and therefore
there may be a great danger.
We could feel
that Armageddon is delaying.
So we might feel the need
to fulfill our dreams already today.
Jehovah teaches me to be patient.
Jehovah is a happy God,
and even when he waits,
he does not wait idly.
Jehovah is hardworking;
he’s always doing something.
When you fill the waiting
with activity, time goes faster.
The field ministry is very important to me.
Sometimes it costs a little effort,
but my service partners are always
a great encouragement to me.
With Jehovah’s help,
we have nice conversations in service.
And even today, we find people
who think about the meaning of life.
Service does not only consist
of house-to-house service;
service is the whole Christian way of life,
including caring for brothers and sisters.
I think serving my brothers and sisters
requires us to set aside time for them.
In this way, I can promote
a good atmosphere in the congregation.
To be in a spiritual paradise,
I must contribute something.
As a result, the spiritual paradise
will be bigger, deeper, and more beautiful!
When we do something for others,
we don’t think too much
about ourselves—our pain.
I think life in Jehovah’s service
is sometimes challenging,
but the result is happiness.
And already today,
I can say that my dream of a happy life
has come true.
We’re encouraged to see
Sister Alena Žitníková and her husband, Petr,
remain busy in Kingdom service.
How wonderful that this has helped them
to have realistic expectations
and continue to remain joyful!
In a world that wants our time and energy,
Alena maintains her focus
by sharing her Christian hope,
caring for her brothers and sisters,
and doing her all to encourage others.
What if you want to encourage others
but you don’t know what to say?
Notice the lessons we learn
from the apostle Paul’s example
in this morning worship
presented by Brother David Schafer.
“If you have
“any word of encouragement . . . ,
tell it.”
Who said those words?
How or what did the apostle Paul
say in response?
How did his audience react?
And what can Paul’s example teach us
about encouragement?
Let’s open our Bibles to Acts chapter 13.
This is the account
of Paul’s first missionary tour.
After a dangerous journey
of about 110 miles (180 km),
Paul and his companions
find themselves seated
in a synagogue in Pisidian Antioch.
Verse 15 says:
“After the public reading
of the Law and the Prophets,
“the presiding officers of the synagogue
sent word to them, saying:
“‘Men, brothers, if you have
any word of encouragement for the people,
tell it.’”
Well, the next five paragraphs
contain Paul’s speech.
How effective was it?
Verses 42-44 show the results.
First, the people begged Paul to come back
and give another talk the next weekend.
Second, many Jews and proselytes
became believers.
Third, on the following Sabbath,
nearly all of the city turned out
to hear Paul’s next talk.
Impressive.
We have to ask ourselves,
‘What did Paul say in those five paragraphs
that was so persuasive?’
One of the first things we note
is his introduction
at Acts 13:17:
“The God of this people Israel chose
our forefathers.”
Now, note that inclusive pronoun “our”
—not your forefathers, not mine—
“our forefathers.”
Did you realize that the last time
that little word was used in the book of Acts
was all the way back in chapter 7
during Stephen’s powerful speech?
Stephen used the word “our” ten times,
usually in connection
with the word “forefathers.”
Paul heard that speech
back when he was Saul of Tarsus.
And now, more than a decade later,
he himself uses the exact same expression
for the same purpose
—to establish common ground.
‘Your ancestors are my ancestors.
I am what you are.’
And that is the starting point
of true encouragement.
The Watchtower  article
from which our text is taken
says that “the Greek word
usually translated ‘encouragement’
literally means ‘a calling to one’s side.’”
And, yes, it’s related
to the Greek word for “comfort,”
which has a similar connotation.
So Paul began from their perspective:
‘I know where you’re coming from.
I grew up
learning the same holy writings as you.’
And then in verses 17-31,
he uses Jewish history and recent events
to prove that Jesus was the Messiah.
Then in verses 32-37, he connects
current events with fulfilled prophecy
—prophecy that they knew.
We do that today, don’t we?
We go to the door; we read Matthew 24:7;
we ask: “What do you think?
“Are the wars, famines, and earthquakes
“that we’ve seen in recent years
the same as ever
or are they a distinct fulfillment
of Bible prophecy?”
And what is the message?
That Jehovah is real; that Jehovah is alive;
his Word is coming true.
And yet, Paul went further, didn’t he?
He didn’t stop there.
In verse 33, Paul said:
“God has completely fulfilled it
to us.”
Yes, this is personal.
Jehovah is at work in your life—in my life.
Then the big conclusion in verses 38-41.
In effect, Jehovah did this for you;
don’t miss out; you can succeed
with Jehovah’s help.
That was Paul’s answer to a simple request
for a “word of encouragement.”
That’s why Paul made disciples.
And isn’t that how we’re counseled to fulfill
our student assignments today?
To strengthen and encourage our audience,
we should show what Jehovah has done,
what he is doing, and what he will yet do.
But Paul’s speech was so persuasive
that it also drew persecution,
which followed him to the next two cities.
In Lystra, his persecutors thought
they had killed him.
But Acts 14:20, 21 says
that “on the next day
“he left with Barnabas for Derbe.
After declaring the good news to that city
and making quite a few disciples,”
they faced a choice.
You can see the choice on Map B13.
We’re looking at the red lines
indicating Paul’s first missionary tour.
Derbe is the last stop,
but notice the next town over to the east
—Tarsus.
Sound familiar?
Saul of Tarsus.
There was a passageway from Derbe to Tarsus.
Paul would have known the road.
He used it on his second missionary journey
and his third missionary journey,
but not this time.
Acts 14:21
—and the red arrows show that Paul returned
to all three cities
where he had been persecuted,
including Pisidian Antioch,
where he first received the request
for a “word of encouragement.”
Why? Why return?
It would have been so easy for him to think:
‘You know, we’ve had a pretty good run here.
‘I helped the ruler of Cyprus into the truth.
‘I performed my first miracle,
striking Elymas blind.
‘We started new congregations
in Pisidian Antioch, Iconium, Lystra, Derbe.
‘I endured all manner of hardships.
‘I was beaten up and stoned
and left for dead.
It was a successful missionary tour,
but I need to regroup.’
No. He didn’t think that way.
Why?
Because the needs of the congregation
outweighed his own personal feelings
or fears.
Do you suppose that the opposers
who stoned him and left him for dead
were any kinder
to the new disciples in Lystra?
Besides, who was taking the lead?
Paul needed to appoint overseers.
This was a weighty task.
So back they went.
Likewise today, our brothers
are putting the needs of the disciples
ahead of their own comforts.
Do you remember these scenes
from Jehovah’s Witnesses—Faith in Action,
Part 2: Let the Light Shine?
Now, Brother Pillars explains
that when he refused
to salute the flag in Winnsboro, Texas,
he was beaten up and hanged.
Thankfully, the rope broke,
and he survived to tell the story.
What the video doesn’t tell us
is that Oscar Pillars was a circuit overseer.
Some months later,
guess where it was time for him to return?
Winnsboro, Texas.
Now, in the months
since the hanging incident,
the brothers hadn’t been preaching downtown
—they were preaching in the rurals.
Brother Pillars reasoned
that if he didn’t preach downtown,
the brothers may never get the courage
to preach there.
So he checked out all the territories
within the city limits.
They worked there all morning and had
a beautiful time with no negative incidents,
except at the very last door.
A woman said, “Say,
you’re one of Jehovah’s Witnesses,
aren’t you?”
He said, “Yes, ma’am, I am.”
She said, “You know,
we hanged one of you people here,
and we’ll do it again.”
Well, he didn’t tell her
that he was the one that they hanged.
But what a beautiful example
of standing with your brothers
and putting their needs
ahead of your own feelings!
And we have to say that this Bethel family
is not self-sparing
when encouragement is needed.
At times, though, it could be easy to think,
‘Well, I just don’t know what to say.’
But is saying something always necessary?
How do you suppose those in Lystra felt
just to see Paul again,
knowing what it must have taken
for him emotionally
simply to return?
That of itself spoke volumes.
‘OK, but I still feel
like I should say something.’
What did Paul say?
Verse 22: “We must enter
into the Kingdom of God
through many tribulations.”
The Kingdom—words of true encouragement
always center on the Kingdom.
You’re not like Job’s false comforters:
‘Clearly, you have problems here.
You must be doing something wrong.’
No, rather: ‘You’re imitating Jesus.
‘It brought the wrath of our enemy.
Well done!
‘And that you’re willing to suffer
proves that this is real.
‘You will see Jehovah back you up now.
‘You will see him reward you in the future.
Stick with it!’
Have you been called on to offer
a “word of encouragement”?
Don’t over think it, just go!
Stand beside those who need you.
And if you have
any words of encouragement for the people,
“tell it.”
Isn’t it faith-strengthening to consider
both first-century and modern-day examples
of brothers who poured themselves out
to encourage others,
even in the face of grave danger?
Has a health condition caused you to pause
and reevaluate your goals and expectations?
Please consider the following interview
that was presented
to the United States Bethel family.
Well, we have many fine examples
of those who have maintained their focus
during extreme life events.
Consider the experience
of Felix and Mayra Terrazas
in the following prerecorded interview.
Well, it’s a privilege
to be with Felix and Mayra Terrazas,
serving at Wallkill.
We understand
it’s been a very difficult year.
Could you share some of the details
of your medical condition?
Well, about a year and a half ago,
I started developing
an infrequent pain in my chest,
which led me to seeing several doctors.
Soon thereafter,
I was diagnosed with a malignant tumor
that was only going to be treatable
by its complete removal.
After the surgery, we were hoping
to hear good news moving forward.
Then, a few weeks later,
one of my doctors conveyed
to us some of the most difficult words
that one could imagine hearing
—a life expectancy of just a few months.
Wow!
That had to have been difficult to hear.
How were you able to get your mind
wrapped around that?
Well, as you can imagine,
after many intense and tearful prayers
asking Jehovah to give us peace of mind
and to give us a calm heart and wisdom
to make a good decision,
we decided on a treatment of hospice care
that would allow me
to make the most of the time that I had left
and to be able to give
my very best to Jehovah.
That’s remarkable, Felix.
And, Mayra, you’re such a supportive wife.
How have you been able to be so positive?
I have to say that it is my hope in Jehovah.
That is what has helped me.
At the moment,
we are ‘sharing in the sufferings’
mentioned at 2 Corinthians 1:7.
But the verse concludes
that ‘we will also share in the comfort,’
and we are also experiencing that right now.
I have no doubt that I’ll see Felix again
in the resurrection.
When I look to the future,
I can vividly picture
us walking through the Paradise earth,
enjoying Jehovah’s beautiful creation.
This is the life, “the real life,”
that Jehovah promises.
And it’s this hope
that gives me joy and peace.
Beautifully expressed.
Thank you.
And, Felix, how have you
been able to be so joyful?
My relationship with Jehovah
has never been stronger than it is right now.
And I believe that it’s this closeness
and this intimacy with him
that is providing me
the joy that I’m experiencing.
Now, Philippians 4:6, 7
assures me that “by prayer
and [by] supplication,”
it says that “the peace of God . . .
will guard your hearts.”
Prayer has been so indispensable
in bringing me peace during this process,
and it’s also amplified my appreciation
for the resurrection
like I’ve never experienced before.
Proverbs 12:25, I think,
perfectly illustrates our current situation.
There it says:
“Anxiety in a man’s heart weighs it down,
but a good word
[it says that it] cheers it up.”
Both Mayra and I have benefited
from what we feel is an enormous storehouse
of good words received in the way of concern,
of love and compassion, from the brotherhood.
And last, my current circumstances
have opened up such a wonderful opportunity
to share Kingdom truths with family members,
including the beautiful privilege
of being able to study the Bible
with my mother during the past few months.
Wow! Amazing!
Tell us, how has this experience
affected your faith and trust in Jehovah?
Well, we have seen Jehovah’s hand
from the very beginning,
but one time sticks out in my mind.
It was the day we received Felix’s prognosis.
That evening,
the Bethel family Watchtower  Study
considered the article
“Keep Calm and Trust in Jehovah,”
and this was followed by a lecture
entitled “Remain
in Jehovah’s Everlasting Arms.”
Jehovah provided us
exactly what we needed to hear
that very day.
We felt it was an answer to our prayers,
as if to reassure us
that he has everything under control.
This has strengthened my faith
in that Jehovah will continue
to “more than superabundantly”
provide for us care and guidance
as we face new challenges
and will without a doubt
fulfill his promises for the future.
I think when you come to understand
that you only have a short time to live,
you know, that’s something that can
very easily knock you right off of your feet.
But we know that we have been grasped
by Jehovah’s caring hands right now,
and that is what’s stabilized us.
You know, throughout this ordeal,
we have seen Jehovah’s love
—his care and assistance—
in every decision, in every step,
that we’ve taken.
From the first visits to the doctors,
through surgery,
and into the most difficult part
of the prognosis,
we have lacked nothing.
I absolutely know that my faith
has only been strengthened
by the challenges of this trial.
So now as I prepare to close my eyes
and fall asleep for just a brief time,
it is a privilege for me
to demonstrate to Jehovah my trust
in all of his promises
and to maintain complete integrity
right down to the end.
What an outstanding expression of faith!
Thank you both so much for sharing
those deeply personal
and motivating expressions.
You are a living example of faith in action,
and we love you.
I can’t tell you
how many times I’ve seen that,
and it’s so moving each time.
On June 8, 2021,
our dear brother Felix
went to sleep in death,
just seven weeks after this interview.
And any, frankly, that were
around the Terrazas during this time
would see firsthand
the power of faith
and their focus on wanting to give
Jehovah their absolute best.
It was tremendous!
Mayra, dear Mayra, continues to show
that same faith and endurance even now.
And Felix’s mother
—she has continued to progress spiritually,
we understand.
Felix will be so happy to hear that.
For me personally,
it’s been heartwarming
to see Mayra’s unshakable faith
and the love and support
she receives from the Bethel family.
Along with Mayra,
we long to see Felix again.
Even in failing health,
he used the strength he had
to build up those around him.
Jehovah truly appreciates shepherds
with this same self-sacrificing spirit.
Did you once serve as a congregation elder?
Can you serve again?
Note the ways Jehovah assisted two brothers
to overcome their feelings of disappointment
and qualify again to serve their brothers.
I served as an elder until the end of 2014.
And that’s when some problems came up,
and I ended up being disqualified.
I had already been serving as an elder
for nearly two years.
But at the time,
I felt that the best thing to do
would be to stop
and give up my privilege of service
so that I could care for myself emotionally.
Before I lost my privileges,
my qualifications were reviewed by the elders
on three separate occasions,
and that ended up dampening my desire
to want to serve again in the future.
I began thinking:
‘A publisher receives
the same reward as an elder.
So why should I put myself
through that all over again?’
When you resign or are disqualified
from serving as an elder,
you’re not immune
to feeling like you’re a failure,
feeling sad,
and especially feeling
that you’ve let Jehovah down.
And it’s a fight to remain active.
One of the biggest things that helped me
during that phase was my wife’s support.
She believed in me and helped motivate me.
My wife was already a pioneer,
and she encouraged me
to start pioneering too.
So within just a few months,
I had already started serving as a pioneer.
It was in the ministry
that I began to cultivate a desire
to serve once again as an elder.
Getting involved
in activities with the congregation,
helping out with the cleaning . . .
Being with my wife in the preaching work,
conducting Bible studies . . .
I had a lot of help from the brothers
who cried with me when I needed to cry
and who laughed with me
when it was possible to laugh.
A mature elder helped me to see
that I needed to leave the matter
in Jehovah’s hands.
That time period
when I stopped serving as an elder,
I can say that that may have been
when I prayed the most in all my life.
I still wasn’t an elder, but I felt at peace.
I remembered 1 John 3:20,
that “[Jehovah] is greater than our hearts”
and that he knew what I was going through.
And just because
I wasn’t serving any longer as an elder,
that didn’t make Jehovah love me any less.
That helped me a lot.
The most difficult thing to overcome
was really the resentment
that I felt toward some brothers
who had participated in the whole process.
The scripture at Psalm 119:165
helped me to see that when you’re going
through a difficult situation,
that’s the time that you need to show
that you love Jehovah.
I could see that during that time of my life,
that’s when I had to show
that I really loved Jehovah.
I would pray to Jehovah each and every day,
and I would mention those brothers by name.
That helped me to start softening my heart,
to lessen and eventually
to eliminate this resentment.
Trusting in Jehovah
was so worth it,
and I felt like it was
a great act of love on his part
to allow me once again to serve as an elder.
And it’s as if he told me,
‘Marcelo, I trust that you are going
to do a good job as an elder.’
We just have to trust in Jehovah.
When I began to show more trust,
that’s when things started happening
in a way that I couldn’t have imagined.
In less than two years,
I had already begun serving
as an elder again.
And in 2016, we received
an invitation to serve at Bethel.
My wife and I
have now been serving here at Bethel
for a little more than ten years.
When you accept the discipline,
then you stop thinking about privileges
and start thinking more about the brothers
and about being more involved
in the ministry.
I still had the most important privilege:
that of being one of Jehovah’s Witnesses.
Today we learned how important it is
to have
realistic and reasonable expectations,
both of ourselves
and of our brothers and sisters.
Instead of being discouraged
with what we cannot do,
we rely on Jehovah
and set goals according to what we can do.
My Teen Life
and our music video reminded us
that Jehovah will give us the help we need
to get back up
if we suffer a spiritual setback.
And in Where Are They Now?
we caught up with Sister Alena Žitníková,
who reminded us
that serving our brothers and sisters
can keep us focused and joyful.
We end this month’s program
with our video postcard
from our brothers and sisters in Costa Rica.
Costa Rica is a sparkling gem
that sits on the so-called Ring of Fire,
a chain approximately 40,000 kilometers,
or 25,000 miles, long
that contains about three quarters
of the earth’s volcanoes.
Costa Rica has 61 volcanoes
—and 6 active ones.
The weather and mountainous countryside
are ideal for growing delicious coffee.
The name Costa Rica
means “Rich Coast” in Spanish.
This is just a small sampling
of the different animal species here.
And some are found nowhere else on earth.
But this country
of more than 5,000,000 inhabitants
boasts other riches
that are truly precious to Jehovah.
Over 32,000 publishers of the good news
live in Costa Rica,
and around 4,000 serve as regular pioneers.
Their territory is vast and diverse.
Even though Spanish is the official language,
there are groups and congregations
in ten languages.
Let’s go to the city of Limón,
established near where
Christopher Columbus arrived
around 1502.
Here we find a Creole-language congregation
in Costa Rica.
Our brothers here
love to participate in the ministry.
For example,
they do phone and letter witnessing,
and they conduct
around 65 Bible studies each month.
Creole-speaking people
have profound respect for God’s Word
and love to learn about Jehovah.
The publishers make good use
of the publications
and videos available
in the Belize Kriol language.
Several of these brothers have helped
with the translation
and audio recording of the Bible
and other publications,
videos, and songs in Belize Kriol.
Our dear brothers and sisters
from Limón, Costa Rica,
send their love and greetings
to the worldwide brotherhood!
And we send all of you our love as well.
From the World Headquarters
of Jehovah’s Witnesses,
this is JW Broadcasting!